What's wrong with the current breed of dating apps?

Usage of dating apps is in rapid decline. I believe that this is not because people are spending less time online (look at the average hours spent per day on TikTok, for one), but that people are not finding dating apps to be a good value proposition for them.

Why is this? Fundamentally, the business model of a subscription-based dating app service puts the company offering the service at odds with the customer. Put simply, the longer you're on the app (dissatisfied) the more likely you are to become a paying customer. Or, if you are already a paying customer, the more you are going to spend.

What does this mean for consumers? Well, fundamentally, that means the promise being sold to you by dating apps (think Hinge: 'Designed to be deleted') is a lie. The longer they can keep you dissatisfied, the more money they make. There is no actual incentive for them to get you what you want. In fact, they are incentivised to make it *seem* like that ideal partner is just one swipe away, just out of arm's (or wallet's) reach. But there is *no reason* that this should be the case.

I believe that the reason things have turned out like this is because of the **subscription-based and / or freemium business model.** Basically, when you have a business model that aims to maximise customer retention, whilst having a product that *minimises* customer retention when customers actually get what they want, you either lose money, or your customers lose their happiness. So why are dating apps choosing this business model?

Simply put, it is lucrative. For a typical paid app, you might get 5 pounds per paying customer, once. For a subscription model, you might get 24 pounds (2 pounds per month, paid yearly, in advance), or, perhaps, 5 pounds per month, indefinitely. Basically, they either let you charge customers more upfront, in anticipation of long-lasting usage, or lift the limits on what a customer *could* pay you, to infinity. But all of this is meaningless if no one actually uses your app. Which, in fact, is what we're now seeing. Match group's stock has been steadily declining since COVID, with no signs of recovery. Bumble stock is in freefall. So, does that mean dating apps are dead?

Perhaps. Or perhaps they just got too greedy. It is possible, in fact, for the service and the customer's ideals to be aligned. All it takes is an upfront payment. What? No freemium? No subscriptions? No. Let me explain. Once you've gotten that money out of the customer, that's all you're going to get. That's it. There is no infinite indefinite revenue, there are no what ifs or buts. Every extra second they spend on your platform, they are incurring a cost on you. And this is good. Because that means you want them to stop using your platform as soon as possible (in a way that makes other people want to pay for it, not just by giving them a terrible experience). So, you find them their date. 

But of course, the multi-million (billion?) dollar question is - in a market where demand for dating apps is in a steady decline, how do you convince people to give you money for a dating service they've never even tried? And I don't have an easy answer for this (if I did, I'd have a billion dollars). The only way this is proven is through evidence, through someone putting in that hard work, the capital, blood and sweat, and seeing if the damn thing actually flies.

I think the (theoretical) answer to this question lies partially in figuring out *where* all these people are going. We're seeing a migration *away* from dating apps, but where are they migrating *to*? Climbing gyms? The fact that modern society lacks Third Spaces is a done to death YouTube video essay topic, so perhaps people aren't going anywhere at all. Maybe they're just at home, on their phones. And if that's the case, then that's surely a good sign for whoever turns this app into a reality. But part of me hopes - wishes, even - that people have become sick of the online world, that they're asking their friends of friends, strangers on the street, people they used to know, to grab a drink and hope for a spark. But right now, at the very least, I'm a pessimist.